SIMD-0088: Enable Core BPF Programs (#88)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0088-enable-core-bpf-programs.md

---
simd: '0088'
title: Enable Core BPF Programs
authors:
  - Joe Caulfield
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2023-11-07
feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

This proposal introduces the concept of Core BPF programs: programs which are
essential to network operations. Currently, these exist as built-in programs
known as "native" programs.

> This SIMD also details the process by which existing native programs shall be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SIMD details the process by which existing native programs can be
```

ported to Core BPF, as well as the process for introducing brand-new Core BPF
programs.

## Motivation

> BPF programs offer less complexity for other clients, such as Firedancer, since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BPF programs offer less complexity than native programs for other clients, such as Firedancer, since
```

The alternative to Core BPF programs is to keep these essential programs as
native programs. This would mean each validator client implementation would have
to build and maintain these built-in programs with their runtime
implementations, including any future changes to these programs introduced via
SIMDs or other fixes.

## New Terminology

- `Core BPF Program`: A BPF program relied on by any part of the Solana stack,
  including (but not limited to) consensus, transaction processing, voting,
  staking, and account creation.

## Detailed Design

Core BPF programs in many ways will be designed no differently than any other
BPF program on Solana. However, some programs may require special privileges,
which is beyond the scope of this SIMD.

When an existing native program is being proposed to be migrated to Core BPF,
or when a new Core BPF program is being introduced, at least one SIMD shall be
published outlining at least the following details:

- How any required special privileges will be granted to the program in its BPF
  form
- How this program's upgrades will be managed after it becomes Core BPF

**Migrating a native program to core BPF** shall consist of deploying a

> BPF version of the native program to a new arbitrary address and, using a
> feature gate, move the BPF program, replacing the existing native program at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BPF version of the native program to a new arbitrary address and using a
feature gate to move the BPF program, replacing the existing native program at
```

---
simd: '0088'
title: Enable Core BPF Programs
authors:
  - Joe Caulfield
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2023-11-07
feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

This proposal introduces the concept of Core BPF programs: programs which are
essential to network operations. Currently, these exist as built-in programs

> known as "native" programs.

Author: I think this is a good shout. Technically, many programs are implemented as native/built-in for performance or privilege reasons. It just so happens these enhanced programs are often relied on by the cluster.

The naming convention for these programs should encapsulate:
1. The program may be relied on by the cluster, but may not be
2. The program may have certain privileges, but may not
3. The program may be non-upgradeable and changed via runtime feature gates, but it may not

In my opinion:
1. "essential" (or similar) captures true, not false
2. "enshrined" (or similar) captures true, not false
3. "special" (or similar) captures true, not false

I feel like "core" is broad enough to encapsulate all branches here. I'm happy to update the proposal to relax some of the wording around "essential to cluster operations" in favor of something similar to what I've written here.

What do you think?

> known as "native" programs.

Author: @ripatel-fd If we're good with "core" I think I'll resolve this one? Lmk, thanks.

updated once.

For this reason, it makes sense to introduce the concept of Core BPF programs:
BPF programs the network depends on that should be treated with special care.

## Alternatives Considered

The alternative to Core BPF programs is to keep these essential programs as
native programs. This would mean each validator client implementation would have
to build and maintain these built-in programs with their runtime
implementations, including any future changes to these programs introduced via
SIMDs or other fixes.

## New Terminology

- `Core BPF Program`: A BPF program relied on by any part of the Solana stack,
  including (but not limited to) consensus, transaction processing, voting,
  staking, and account creation.

## Detailed Design

Core BPF programs in many ways will be designed no differently than any other
BPF program on Solana. However, some programs may require special privileges,
which is beyond the scope of this SIMD.

When an existing native program is being proposed to be migrated to Core BPF,
or when a new Core BPF program is being introduced, at least one SIMD shall be
published outlining at least the following details:

> - How any required special privileges will be granted to the program in its BPF

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- How any required special privileges will be granted to the program in its BPF
- The interface for the program.
- A precise and complete specification of the behavior.
```

Author: Added.

  form

> - How this program's upgrades will be managed after it becomes Core BPF

Reviewer 2: This show be standardized

Author: For example, we may choose to make some programs upgradeable - like Feature Gate - but others could be non-upgradeable - like System - therefore they'd have separate loaders and different ways of introducing changes, if need be.

Author: @lheeger-jump Curious what you think here. I'm leaning towards less standardization for the reasons listed above.

**Migrating a native program to core BPF** shall consist of deploying a
BPF version of the native program to a new arbitrary address and using a
feature gate to move the BPF program, replacing the existing native program at
its program address.

In the context of this design, **target program** refers to an existing native
program, while **source program** refers to the BPF version to be moved into the
existing program account.

The migration process must adhere to the following steps:

1. Verifiably build the source BPF program.
2. Generate a new keypair for the source program.

> 3. Deploy the program to the source program address.

Author: I'm thinking it _should_ work if you're just deploying and not invoking the program (right?).

In theory, if the core BPF program at say `11111111111111111111111111111111` has special privileges, then unless the executable lives at `11111111111111111111111111111111` it's not going to be able to use those privileges. So you deploy the BPF version of it to some arbitrary address, and if it was to be invoked at that arbitrary address it would fail to load. However, it shouldn't ever be invoked at that arbitrary address. It's only temporarily living there until the swap is complete.

Additionally, I think if any tweaks are necessary in the future as we figure out how to provide all of these core BPF programs with the necessary privileges, we can issue another proposal to modify the process or introduce a new one.

> 3. Deploy the program to the source program address.

Reviewer 2: More discussion is required from VM stakeholders about privileged execution before I can consider approval. I do not want to add more syscalls if they all have to be re-invented in PRv2.

> 3. Deploy the program to the source program address.

Reviewer 2: Can't we just use the same address?

Reviewer 3: I think we need to replace the program at the original address anyway, otherwise all its owned accounts will not be available to the replacement.

Author: To replace a native program with a BPF program, you'd have to deploy the BPF version to some arbitrary address, then move it into the account at the original address. That would result in the address being unchanged and the program being replaced with BPF.

See [my comment here](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/88#discussion_r1441929536).

Reviewer 2: That is fine.

> 3. Deploy the program to the source program address.

Author: > More discussion is required from VM stakeholders about privileged execution before I can consider approval. I do not want to add more syscalls if they all have to be re-invented in PRv2.

Fair point. I guess the question is, does the number of syscalls block us from migration _any_ native program to BPF?

In other words, is it possible we could move this SIMD along to acknowledge that at least _some_ programs will be migrated, and then assess the impact of any necessary syscalls when the SIMDs outlining migration specifications are proposed for a program requiring privileges?

> 3. Deploy the program to the source program address.

Author: Up-voting previous message by @ripatel-fd. If we can move this proposal along to introduce these programs and their migration path, then each program's migration SIMD - outlining the details of its migration to BPF - can tackle privileges.

If we learn that privileged programs will need a different migration path, we can publish another SIMD that adds the necessary changes to the migration process, and block any program migration SIMDs on that new proposal.

4. Generate a new keypair for the feature gate.
5. Create a new feature gate to replace the target program with the source BPF

>    program.

Reviewer 4: do you have a mechanism in mind for how this replacement would take place? unless im missing something even with loader v4 you would need to run a transaction to replace the bytecode of target with source

Author: We would basically build out a revamped version of this function, and call it from a runtime feature gate on epoch rollover.

https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/a2d2eb3ba80824f55c9cbd267ab881a285ca324a/runtime/src/bank.rs#L7985

built into the runtime for essential cluster operations. Depending on how these
programs are elected to be upgraded, there are some obvious security
considerations around who can upgrade these programs and when. Any new Core BPF
program should follow a fully-fledged SIMD process addressing these concerns.

When it comes to migrating native programs to core BPF, this change introduces a
serious security consideration surrounding the replacement of an essential
program with the contents of another account. This is an extremely sensitive
process that must be handled with maximum caution. If a core program is modified
incorrectly, or somehow erased during migration, it could have immediate and
fatal consequences for the network.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal itself does not directly introduce any breaking changes. The code
introduced to migrate native programs to core BPF programs will exist off of the
runtime's "hot path" until it's actually used for a migration.

When a migration is conducted, the core BPF version will be more than backwards
compatible. It must provide the exact same results as the native program it aims

> to replace.

Reviewer: This makes me feel more strongly about removing the phrase "modified program" everywhere above.

built into the runtime for essential cluster operations. Depending on how these
programs are elected to be upgraded, there are some obvious security
considerations around who can upgrade these programs and when. Any new Core BPF
program should follow a fully-fledged SIMD process addressing these concerns.

When it comes to migrating native programs to core BPF, this change introduces a
serious security consideration surrounding the replacement of an essential
program with the contents of another account. This is an extremely sensitive
process that must be handled with maximum caution. If a core program is
reimplemented incorrectly, or somehow erased during migration, it could have
immediate and fatal consequences for the network.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal itself does not directly introduce any breaking changes. The code
introduced to migrate native programs to core BPF programs will exist off of the
runtime's "hot path" until it's actually used for a migration.

When a migration is conducted, the core BPF version will be more than backwards
compatible. It must provide the exact same results as the native program it aims
to replace.

> When a migration is conducted, the BPF version of a native program will be

Reviewer 5: Dup of line 112?

Author: Yes, sorry. Thanks!

to core BPF.

## Motivation

With the advent of Program Runtime v2 and Firedancer, native programs will
eventually become BPF programs.

Program Runtime v2 will introduce a brand-new ABI for on-chain programs, and the
native programs will need to be revised to support it.

BPF programs offer less complexity for other clients, such as Firedancer, since
developers will no longer have to keep up with program changes in their runtime
implementations. Instead, the program can just be modified once. 

For these reasons, it makes sense to introduce the concept of Core BPF programs:
BPF programs the network depends on that should be upgraded with a special
process.

With an explicit process in place for upgrading Core BPF programs, engineers can
safely manage changes to essential programs through feature gates. The feature
gate process requries incremental activations on each cluster: testnet, then
devnet, then mainnet-beta. This is extremely valuable for ensuring a change has
been safely integrated and will not have negative effects on mainnet-beta.

This same explicit process can be used to migrate existing native programs to

> their new Core BPF versions.

Reviewer 6: This is going outside of the motivation and summarizing the approach. How about moving this to the summary?

## Alternatives Considered

> An alternative approach to managing upgrades to essential core programs could be

Reviewer 6: nit: let's use the new terminology!
```suggestion
An alternative approach to managing upgrades to core BPF programs could be
```

to make these core BPF programs _upgradeable_ and establish a multi-signature
upgrade authority. This authority could be comprised of key-holders from each
validator client: Solana Labs, Jito, Jump, and possibly Syndica (Sig).

However, this approach adds additional layers of complexity around upgrading

> these programs behind a feature-gate.

Reviewer 6: Sorry, I don't think I understand this point. How does a feature gate come into play if you're using a multisig? 

From the way I understand it, a multisig is more dangerous because it means potential changes at any time, whereas a feature gate is preferred because it has such a long lead time to deployment, and requires validators to upgrade their software to signal their acceptance of the change.

Reviewer 6: Oh I see, so you have the option of doing either upgrade path? That seems overly complicated to describe, and we'll get much more out of differentiating with a plain multisig

Author: Lmk if the updated description is too verbose.

## New Terminology

- `Core BPF Program`: A **non-upgradeable** BPF program relied on by any part of
  the Solana stack, including (but not limited to) consensus, transaction
  processing, voting, staking, and account creation.
- `Target Program`: The core program intending to be changed by some
  feature activation.
- `Source Program`: The modified version of a core program intending to be moved

>   in place of the existing core program.

Reviewer 6: This doesn't seem like new terminology, and more about defining terms for the design. Let's move these into the detailed design portion

## Detailed Design

Core BPF programs shall be non-upgradeable BPF programs deployed with

> `BPFLoader2111111111111111111111111111111111`.

Reviewer 6: Side note: we should check with the runtime team to see if it's preferred to have them as "final" upgradeable programs. I always forget which one is better for the runtime and avoids copying the program data into the vm

Author: Asked the VM guys, will circle back with an update.

Author: Actually circling back, it appears neither has a significant VM-related advantage.

With that being said, I feel like, since v2 (non-upgradeable) is _not_ deprecated, it actually feels a little more official to lock these special Core BPF programs into the "final" loader - as written in the SIMD now. Basically, they're intentionally designed to not be upgraded by a keypair authority. What do you think?

Author: Just for clarity, the concept of "which loader owns all formerly native Core BPF programs" has been removed from this SIMD. Now, one must define this specification in the SIMD that outlines that specific native program's migration to Core BPF.

Core BPF programs must only be modified through feature gates.

**Upgrading a core BPF program** shall consist of deploying the modified program

> source code to a new arbitrary address as a **non-upgradeable** BPF program and

Reviewer 6: nit: it's not the source code deployed
```suggestion
to a new arbitrary address as a **non-upgradeable** BPF program and
```

> creating a feature gate to, using the runtime, move the modified program in
> place of the existing program. 

Reviewer 6: nit: It might be worth making it completely clear what the runtime needs to do, ie
```suggestion
using a feature gate to move the modified program in
place of the existing program. The feature gate is required to circumvent
normal transaction processing rules and replace the contents of one account
with another directly at the runtime level.
```

Note, since this deployed program will be deployed using the non-upgradeable BPF
loader (`BPFLoader2111111111111111111111111111111111`), it will consist of only
a program account, with no additional program _data_ account.

This process must adhere to the following steps:

1. Verifiably build the modified program.
2. Generate a new keypair for the **source** program.
3. Deploy the program to the **source** address.
4. Generate a new keypair for the **feature gate**.
5. Create a new feature gate for replacing the **target** program with the
   **source** (modified) program.
6. Follow the existing process for activating features.

An additional optional field could be added to feature gate issues for the
**target program** being upgraded.

**Migrating a native program** to a core BPF program shall consist of following
the exact steps outlined above with the modified BPF version of the program.
This will effectively replace the program at the target address with its core

> BPF implementation.

Reviewer 6: Up to you, but I think there might be more to this since the runtime will also need to remove any special-casing for that address during transaction processing.

Author: I think it's worth including the additional steps in the SIMD. What does it look like to remove special casing?

Author: Since this SIMD is now slimmed down and mentions that upon any migration, a SIMD outlining the migration and Core BPF specifications should be published, I think describing special casing removal isn't necessary here.

However, I've added it to the necessary details for such a SIMD as mentioned in this proposal.

Some additional checks should be run when doing a migration instead of an
upgrade, such as:

- Validating the native program's owner is
  `NativeLoader1111111111111111111111111111111`

> - Ensuring the core BPF program has the correct state

Reviewer 6: Sorry, what does this mean?

Author: I was originally moving toward some validation/checks that had to do with native program instruction/state, but I don't think it's going to work or worth adding.

This was a straggler from those ideas.

## Impact

This proposed change would result in a new process for upgrading core programs.
Although this process will still require feature gates as it does now, the
change is handled completely differently.

The act of deploying the modified program and using a runtime feature gate to
move it into the proper account will be an entirely new way of upgrading
programs that were previously native.

> Core contributors will have to become comfortable with this process.

Reviewer 6: I think we can remove this line

## Security Considerations

This proposal provides a secure means for upgrading core BPF programs - a
process that will be increasingly valuable as new core BPF programs are created.

However, this change also introduces a critical security consideration
surrounding the replacement of a core program with the contents of another
account. This is an extremely sensitive process that must be handled with
maximum caution.

If a core program is modified incorrectly, or somehow erased during migration,
it could have immediate and fatal consequences for the network.

## Backwards Compatibility

> This feature itself does not directly introduce any breaking changes.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure this is true, since the BPF program will exist at the address instead of the native program, which is a breaking change on the network.

Author: Oh, I was referring to the addition of the code that does the swap/upgrade. Without actually using it on a program, merely introducing it off the hot path, doesn't introduce any breaking changes.

When this proposed process is used to migrate a native program to core BPF, that

> program will be completely backwards compatible.

Reviewer 6: It might be nice to point out that the core BPF implementation must be more than backwards compatible, and provide exactly the same results as the current native program.

BPF program on Solana. However, some programs may require special privileges,
which is beyond the scope of this SIMD.

When an existing native program is being proposed to be migrated to Core BPF,
or when a new Core BPF program is being introduced, at least one SIMD shall be
published outlining at least the following details:

- How any required special privileges will be granted to the program in its BPF
  form
- How this program's upgrades will be managed after it becomes Core BPF

**Migrating a native program to core BPF** shall consist of deploying a
BPF version of the native program to a new arbitrary address and, using a
feature gate, move the BPF program, replacing the existing native program at
its program address.

In the context of this design, **target prorgam** refers to an existing native
program, while **source program** refers to the BPF version to be moved into the
existing program account.

In the context of this design, **source program** shall be the BPF version of
a native program intending to be moved in place of the existing native program,

> while **target program** is that existing program.

Author: ahh whoops!
